ADR for billing system (#144)
vshn/application-catalog-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0033-event-based-billing-oddo.adoc

= ADR 0033 - Event-Based Billing
:adr_author:    Gabriel Saratura
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers:
:adr_date:      2025-06-02
:adr_upd_date:  2025-06-02
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      billing,odoo

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====

> With the upcoming support for event-based billing, our current approach for sending usage data for VSHN services needs to evolve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For sending billing events to Odoo (https://docs.central.vshn.ch/event-billing.html[Event Based Billing^]), well use the existing AppCat controller to manage billing events and Kubernetes CRDs as the persistence mechanism.
```

The summary in an ADR summarizes the decision.

====

== Requirements

> . Reuse existing tools and/or components of AppCat to build a resilient event-based billing solution.
> . Enable resending data to Odoo (historical record retention is required).
> . Persist the state of each billing request.
> . Do not block service creation, deletion, or update due to errors in the billing system.
> . [[odoo-sync-state]] Provide a way to verify sync state between Odoo and the Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Reuse existing tools and/or components of AppCat to build a resilient event-based billing solution.
. Enable resending data to Odoo (historical record retention is required).
. Persist the state of each billing request.
. Do not block service creation, deletion, or update due to errors in the billing system.
. [[odoo-sync-state]] Provide a way to verify sync state between Odoo and the Kubernetes cluster.
. Do not lose any event (created, deleted, scaled), as this has a direct financial impact.
```

* Full SQL support.
* ACID-compliant (supports WAL mode).
* Self-contained `.db` file that's easy to handle and back up.
* Supports pagination and filtering by retry state or timestamp.

*Cons:*

* Not suitable for concurrent writes across multiple pods.
* Requires manual effort for backups, failover, and compaction.
* Not distributed or highly available.
* Lacks integration with Kubernetes tools like `kubectl`.
* Not inherently event-driven.

=== Custom Kubernetes CRDs

Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) can be used to model billing events as native Kubernetes objects.

*Pros:*

* Native integration with Kubernetes and observable via `kubectl`.
* Supports event-driven architectures through controllers.
* State tracking via `.status` fields.
* Reusable by other tools/controllers within the cluster.
* Scales horizontally (no single-writer limitation).

*Cons:*

* Excessive CR volume may cause etcd bloat, impacting cluster performance.
* Increased API server traffic.
* Requires boilerplate for CRD definitions and status handling.
* No native support for complex queries (unlike SQL).
* Manual schema migration is necessary.
* No built-in audit trail beyond resource versioning.

> == Recommendation

Reviewer 2: You can still call it a decision, that's how we always did it.

=== Use Controller + Custom Kubernetes CRD

The recommendation is to extend the existing AppCat controller to manage event-based billing and using Kubernetes CRDs as the persistence mechanism.

*Justification:*

* A controller is the natural place for billing, as it sits adjacent to service lifecycle management without coupling to it.
* CRDs integrate well into our Kubernetes-native toolset and align with GitOps principles.
* Data inspection and interaction via `kubectl` is simple and consistent with existing workflows.
* While CRs are harder to query than SQL databases, we can mitigate this by providing predefined `kubectl` query templates for common tasks.

> * Kubernetes retry mechanisms can be leveraged for automatic re-delivery of failed events.

Reviewer 3: We need to be careful here. Events are only present on a cluster for up to 1 hour. Therefore, we can't re-deliver anything older than 1 hour. This is especially true if the CR is deleted as we can't get any information from there either (eg. status field)

Reviewer 2: We should also definitely set finalizers on those objects. So we can be sure they don't get deleted by accident.

Author: yes we need

Author: Added a finaliser in my CR example

* By using `patch` operations on CRs, we can flag specific events for manual resending to Odoo.
* With careful CRD schema design (e.g., using one CR per service instead of one per event), we can avoid overwhelming etcd.

> * If detailed auditing is needed, it can be delegated to an external logging or database system.

Reviewer 2: True, if we ever need more advanced queries we can just schlurp everything into a sql database then.

This hybrid approach gives us robust control, observability, and operational flexibility for event-based billing with minimal compromise.

[NOTE]
.xref:odoo-sync-state[Odoo Sync State]
====
Currently, we have no reliable way to automatically verify whether the state in Odoo matches what exists in the cluster (whether stored in SQLite or as Custom Resources).

At present, Odoo does not expose a `GET` endpoint to retrieve billing records, which limits our ability to perform data reconciliation.

This endpoint has already been requested to improve the robustness of the system and ensure consistency between Odoo and the cluster.

> ====

Author: ok, we will discuss that within the team

= ADR 0033 - Event-Based Billing
:adr_author:    Gabriel Saratura
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers:
:adr_date:      2025-06-02
:adr_upd_date:  2025-06-02
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      billing,odoo

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
For sending billing events to Odoo (https://docs.central.vshn.ch/event-billing.html[Event Based Billing^]), will use the existing AppCat controller to manage billing events and Kubernetes CRDs as the persistence mechanism.
====

== Requirements

. Reuse existing tools and/or components of AppCat to build a resilient event-based billing solution.

> . Enable resending data to Odoo (historical record retention is required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Make data resending to Odoo possible in case it's required (historical record retention is required).
```

. Persist the state of each billing request.
. Do not block service creation, deletion, or update due to errors in the billing system.
. [[odoo-sync-state]] Provide a way to verify sync state between Odoo and the Kubernetes cluster.
. Do not lose any event (created, deleted, scaled), as this has a direct financial impact.

== Solution Options

After careful evaluation, the two most promising solutions for implementing event-based billing are:

. <<AppCat Controller>>
. <<Runtime Library via Crossplane Composition Functions>>

=== AppCat Controller

Transitioning from metered to event-based billing requires leveraging Kubernetes controllers more extensively.
Our existing AppCat controller already handles event forwarding and webhooks, making it a natural candidate for integrating billing logic.

> *Pros:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pros::
```
Please use that format on the other pro/con listings as well. See https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/lists/description/

* Full control over the lifecycle of VSHN custom resource services.
* Customizable retry logic.
* Clear separation of concerns between billing and service management.
* Flexible support for different persistence backends.

*Cons:*

> * More difficult to block or revert service operations when billing events fail to post to Odoo.

Reviewer: Why is that a con? In requirements we write that we don't want that anyway.

Author: Indeed you are right, I will remove this. I followed general pros and cons without considering the requirements.

=== Runtime Library via Crossplane Composition Functions

We can embed billing logic into our existing runtime library for Crossplane Composition Functions, thereby coupling service lifecycle events directly with billing logic.

*Pros:*

* Reconciliation happens directly during create, update, or delete operations.

> * Greater control over services when billing fails.

Reviewer: This actually is a con when compared to the requirements?

* Billing logic is treated as a first-class part of provisioning/deprovisioning.

*Cons:*

* Persistence integration becomes more complex.
* No clear separation between billing and service logic.
* Unclear where billing actually occurs, which can reduce maintainability.
* We can't actually react on deletion events. Crossplane doesn't propagate them to the functions.

== Persistence Options

Based on past experience, we anticipate the need to resend older data to Odoo due to potential issues either in AppCat or Odoo.
A lightweight, reliable mechanism to store and replay billing data is essential.

Required capabilities:

* Filtering and querying historical events.
* Manual replay.
* Partial delivery of historical events.

=== SQLite

SQLite is a simple, embedded SQL database engine suitable for local persistence needs.

*Pros:*

* Minimal setup; no external infrastructure required.
* Fast for local and sequential read/write operations.
* Full SQL support.
* ACID-compliant (supports WAL mode).
* Self-contained `.db` file that's easy to handle and back up.
* Supports pagination and filtering by retry state or timestamp.

> *Cons:*

Reviewer: While I agree with the cons, they barely reflect the requirements defined. But fine by me to leave it like this.

    itemDescription: "Human readable description"
    itemGroupDescription: "My Item Group"
    unitID: "vshn_event_billing.uom_instance_hour"
status:
  events:                                        #<7>
    - type: "deleted"
      productId: "Y"
      size: "3"
      timestamp: "2025-06-20T13:00:00Z"
      state: "sent|pending|failed"               #<8>
    - type: "scaled"
      productId: "Y"
      size: "3"
      timestamp: "2025-05-20T13:00:00Z"
      state: "sent|pending|failed"
    - type: "scaled"
      productId: "Y"
      size: "2"
      timestamp: "2025-04-20T13:00:00Z"
      state: "sent|pending|failed"
    - type: "created"
      productId: "X"
      size: "1"
      timestamp: "2025-03-20T13:00:00Z"
      state: "sent|pending|failed"
  conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-05-25T15:35:02Z"
      reason: ReconcileSuccess
      status: "True"
      type: Synced
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-25T18:45:38Z"
      reason: Available
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
----

<1> An on-demand trigger to resend events from the `status.events` list based on their `state`.
<2> Unique name of the composite - serves as the identifier for the Billing CR.

> <3> All Billing CRs reside in the `syn-appcat` namespace.

Reviewer: A rationale why this namespace would help in understanding it.

<4> A finalizer from the controller to protect from accidental deletion.

> <5> The field defines after how many days the CR should be deleted.

Reviewer: What happens when an instance is still running after this time has passed?
